<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chief among these were Fourier and Saint-Simon, who constructed somewhat fantastic Socialistic ideal commonwealths. Proudhon, with whom Marx had some not wholly friendly relations, is to be regarded as a forerunner of the Anarchists rather than of orthodox Socialism. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marx mentions the English Socialists with praise in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Poverty of Philosophy</i> (1847). They, like him, tend to base their arguments upon a Ricardian theory of value, but they have not his scope or erudition or scientific breadth. Among them may be mentioned Thomas Hodgskin (1787⁠–⁠1869), originally an officer in the Navy, but dismissed for a pamphlet critical of the methods of naval discipline, author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Labour Defended Against the Claims of Capital</i> (1825) and other works; William Thompson (1785⁠–⁠1833), author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Inquiry into the Principles of Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive to Human Happiness</i> (1824), and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Labour Rewarded</i> (1825); and Piercy Ravenstone, from whom Hodgskin’s ideas are largely derived. Perhaps more important than any of these was Robert Owen. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first and most important volume appeared in 1867; the other two volumes were published posthumously (1885 and 1894). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 227. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 237, 238. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239, 240. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 758, 759. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 788, 789. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozial-Demokratie</i>.</p>
					<p>In March, 1914, Bernstein delivered a lecture in Budapest, in which he withdrew from several of the positions he had taken up (vide Budapest <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="de">Volkstimme</i>, March 19, 1914). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Décomposition du Marxisme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 53. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Musings of a Chinese Mystic</i>. Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu. With an Introduction by Lionel Giles, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.A.</abbr> (<abbr>Oxon.</abbr>). Wisdom of the East Series, John Murray, 1911. Pages 66⁠–⁠68. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An account of the life of Bakunin from the Anarchist standpoint will be found in <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> of the complete edition of his works: Michel Bakounine, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Œuvres</i>, Tome <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Avec une notice biographique, des avant-propos et des notes, par James Guillaume. Paris, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.-V.</abbr> Stock, Éditeur, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxiii</span>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Criticism of these theories will be reserved for Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ibid. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Marx, as a thinker, is on the right road. He has established as a principle that all the evolutions, political, religious, and juridical, in history are, not the causes, but the effects of economic evolutions. This is a great and fruitful thought, which he has not absolutely invented; it has been glimpsed, expressed in part, by many others besides him; but in any case to him belongs the honor of having solidly established it and of having enunciated it as the basis of his whole economic system.” (1870; <abbr>ib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>.) <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This title is not Bakunin’s, but was invented by Cafiero and Elisée Reclus, who edited it, not knowing that it was a fragment of what was intended to he the second version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Empire Knouto-Germanique</i> (see <abbr>ib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. p 283). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paris, 1894. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The attitude of all the better Anarchists is that expressed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. S.</abbr> Bevington in the words: “Of course we know that among those who call themselves Anarchists there are a minority of unbalanced enthusiasts who look upon every illegal and sensational act of violence as a matter for hysterical jubilation. Very useful to the police and the press, unsteady in intellect and of weak moral principle, they have repeatedly shown themselves accessible to venal considerations. They, and their violence, and their professed Anarchism are purchasable, and in the last resort they are welcome and efficient partisans of the bourgeoisie in its remorseless war against the deliverers of the people.” His conclusion is a very wise one: “Let us leave indiscriminate killing and injuring to the Government⁠—to its Statesmen, its Stockbrokers, its Officers, and its Law.” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchism and Violence</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9⁠–⁠10. Liberty Press, Chiswick, 1896.) <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See next Chapter. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of which the Independent Labor Party is only a section. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And also in Italy. A good, short account of the Italian movement is given by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Lanzillo, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Mouvement Ouvrier en Italie</i>, Bibliothèque du Mouvement Prolétarien. See also Paul Louis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Syndicalisme Européen</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. On the other hand Cole (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">World of Labour</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>) considers the strength of genuine Syndicalism in Italy to be small. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is often recognized by Syndicalists themselves. See, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr>, an article on “The Old International” in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Syndicalist</i> of February, 1913, which, after giving an account of the struggle between Marx and Bakunin from the standpoint of a sympathizer with the latter, says: “Bakounin’s ideas are now more alive than ever.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>pp.</abbr> 42⁠–⁠43, and 160 of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Syndicalism in France</i>, Louis Levine, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ph. D.</abbr> (Columbia University Studies in Political Science, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3.) This is a very objective and reliable account of the origin and progress of French Syndicalism. An admirable short discussion of its ideas and its present position will be found in Cole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">World of Labour</i> (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bell &amp; Sons), especially chapters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Levine, <abbr>op.</abbr> <abbr>cit.</abbr>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cole, <abbr>ib.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 65. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Syndicat in France still means a local union⁠—there are at the present day only four national syndicats” (<abbr>ib.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 66). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cole, <abbr>ib.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 69. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In fact the General Strike was invented by a Londoner, William Benbow, an Owenite, in 1831. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">World of Labour</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212, 213. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted in Cole, <abbr>ib.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 128. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ib.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 135. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brooks, <abbr>op.</abbr> <abbr>cit.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 79. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brooks, <abbr>op.</abbr> <abbr>cit.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 86⁠–⁠87. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Although uniformly held that the writ of habeas corpus can only be suspended by the legislature, in these labor disturbances the executive has in fact suspended or disregarded the writ. ... In cases arising from labor agitations, the judiciary has uniformly upheld the power exercised by the military, and in no case has there been any protest against the use of such power or any attempt to curtail it, except in Montana, where the conviction of a civilian by military commission was annulled” (“Final Report of the Commission on Industrial Relations (1915) appointed by the United States Congress,” p. 58). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Literary Digest, May 2 and May 16, 1914. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ideas of Guild Socialism were first set forth in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">National Guilds</i>, edited by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. R.</abbr> Orage (Bell &amp; Sons, 1914), and in Cole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">World of Labour</i> (Bell &amp; Sons), first published in 1913. Cole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Self-Government in Industry</i> (Bell &amp; Sons, 1917) and Rickett &amp; Bechhofer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Meaning of National Guilds</i> (Palmer &amp; Hayward, 1918) should also be read, as well as various pamphlets published by the National Guilds League. The attitude of the Syndicalists to Guild Socialism is far from sympathetic. An article in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Syndicalist</i> for February, 1914, speaks of it in the following terms: a Middle-class of the middle-class, with all the shortcomings (we had almost said ‘stupidities’) of the middle-classes writ large across it, ‘Guild Socialism’ stands forth as the latest lucubration of the middle-class mind. It is a ‘cool steal’ of the leading ideas of Syndicalism and a deliberate perversion of them.⁠ ⁠… We do protest against the ‘State’ idea⁠ ⁠… in Guild Socialism. Middle-class people, even when they become Socialists, cannot get rid of the idea that the working-class is their ‘inferior’; that the workers need to be ‘educated,’ drilled, disciplined, and generally nursed for a very long time before they will be able to walk by themselves. The very reverse is actually the truth.⁠ ⁠… It is just the plain truth when we say that the ordinary wage-worker, of average intelligence, is better capable of taking care of himself than the half-educated middle-class man who wants to advise him. He knows how to make the wheels of the world go round.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The above quotations are all from the first pamphlet of the National Guilds League, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">National Guilds, an Appeal to Trade Unionists</i>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Guild Idea</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 of the Pamphlets of the National Guilds League, <abbr>p.</abbr> 17. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fields, Factories and Workshops</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 74. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ib.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 81. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fields, Factories, and Workshops</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 6. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Notwithstanding the egotistic turn given to the public mind by the merchant-production of our century, the Communist tendency is continually reasserting itself and trying to make its way into public life. The penny bridge disappears before the public bridge; and the turnpike road before the free road. The same spirit pervades thousands of other institutions. Museums, free libraries, and free public schools; parks and pleasure grounds; paved and lighted streets, free for everybody’s use; water supplied to private dwellings, with a growing tendency towards disregarding the exact amount of it used by the individual, tramways and railways which have already begun to introduce the season ticket or the uniform tax, and will surely go much further on this line when they are no longer private property: all these are tokens showing in what direction further progress is to be expected.”⁠—Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An able discussion of this question, at of various others, from the standpoint of reasoned and temperate opposition to Anarchism, will be found in Alfred Naquet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Anarchie et le Collectivisme</i>, Paris, 1904. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Overwork is repulsive to human nature⁠—not work. Overwork for supplying the few with luxury⁠—not work for the well-being of all. Work, labor, is a physiological necessity, a necessity of spending accumulated bodily energy, a necessity which is health and life itself. If so many branches of useful work are so reluctantly done now, it is merely because they mean overwork, or they are improperly organized. But we know⁠—old Franklin knew it⁠—that four hours of useful work every day would be more than sufficient for supplying everybody with the comfort of a moderately well-to-do middle-class house, if we all gave ourselves to productive work, and if we did not waste our productive powers as we do waste them now. As to the childish question, repeated for fifty years: ‘Who would do disagreeable work?’ frankly I regret that none of our savants has ever been brought to do it, be it for only one day in his life. If there is still work which is really disagreeable in itself, it is only because our scientific men have never cared to consider the means of rendering it less so: they have always known that there were plenty of starving men who would do it for a few pence a day.” Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“As to the so-often repeated objection that nobody would labor if he were not compelled to do so by sheer necessity, we heard enough of it before the emancipation of slaves in America, as well as before the emancipation of serfs in Russia; and we have had the opportunity of appreciating it at its just value. So we shall not try to convince those who can be convinced only by accomplished facts. As to those who reason, they ought to know that, if it really was so with some parts of humanity at its lowest stages⁠—and yet, what do we know about it?⁠—or if it is so with some small communities, or separate individuals, brought to sheer despair by ill-success in their struggle against unfavorable conditions, it is not so with the bulk of the civilized nations. With us, work is a habit, and idleness an artificial growth.” Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 30. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“While holding this synthetic view on production, the Anarchists cannot consider, like the Collectivists, that a remuneration which would be proportionate to the hours of labor spent by each person in the production of riches may be an ideal, or even an approach to an ideal, society.” Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 20. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I do not say freedom is the greatest of <em>all</em> goods: the best things come from within⁠—they are such things as creative art, and love, and thought. Such things can be helped or hindered by political conditions, but not actually produced by them; and freedom is, both in itself and in its relation to these other goods the best thing that political and economic conditions can secure. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Communist Manifesto, <abbr>p.</abbr> 22. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“On the other hand, the <em>State</em> has also been confused with <em>government</em>. As there can be no State without government, it has been sometimes said that it is the absence of government, and not the abolition of the State, that should be the aim.</p>
					<p>“It seems to me, however, that State and government represent two ideas of a different kind. The State idea implies quite another idea to that of government. It not only includes the existence of a power placed above society, but also a <em>territorial concentration</em> and a <em>concentration of many functions of the life of society in the hands of a few or even of all</em>. It implies new relations among the members of society.</p>
					<p>“This characteristic distinction, which perhaps escapes notice at first sight, appears clearly when the origin of the State is studied.” Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The State</i>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 4. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Representative government has accomplished its historical mission; it has given a mortal blow to Court-rule; and by its debates it has awakened public interest in public questions. But, to see in it the government of the future Socialist society, is to commit a gross error. Each economical phase of life implies its own political phase; and it is impossible to touch the very basis of the present economical life⁠—private property⁠—without a corresponding change in the very basis of the political organization. Life already shows in which direction the change will be made. Not in increasing the powers of the State, but in resorting to free organization and free federation in all those branches which are now considered as attributes of the State.” Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28⁠–⁠29. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On this subject there is an excellent discussion in the before-mentioned work of Monsieur Naquet. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“As to the third⁠—the chief⁠—objection, which maintains the necessity of a government for punishing those who break the law of society, there is so much to say about it that it hardly can be touched incidentally. The more we study the question, the more we are brought to the conclusion that society itself is responsible for the antisocial deeds perpetrated in its midst, and that no punishment, no prisons, and no hangmen can diminish the numbers of such deeds; nothing short of a reorganization of society itself. Three-quarters of all the acts which are brought every year before our courts have their origin, either directly or indirectly, in the present disorganized state of society with regard to the production and distribution of wealth⁠—not in the perversity of human nature. As to the relatively few antisocial deeds which result from antisocial inclinations of separate individuals, it is not by prisons, nor even by resorting to the hangmen, that we can diminish their numbers. By our prisons, we merely multiply them and render them worse. By our detectives, our ‘price of blood,’ our executions, and our jails, we spread in society such a terrible flow of basest passions and habits, that he who should realize the effects of these institutions to their full extent, would be frightened by what society is doing under the pretext of maintaining morality. We must search for other remedies, and the remedies have been indicated long since.” Kropotkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31⁠–⁠32. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Anarchist Communism</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 27. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was written before the author had any personal experience of the prison system. He personally met with nothing but kindness at the hands of the prison officials. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bell, 1917. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Walter Scott Publishing Company, 1906, <abbr>p.</abbr> 262. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was written in March, 1918, almost the darkest moment of the war. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Anarchie et le Collectivisme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 114. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Which we discussed in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Self-Government in Industry</i>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bell &amp; Sons, 1917, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 110⁠–⁠111. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some may fear that the result would be an undue increase of population, but such fears I believe to be groundless. See above, Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, on “Work and Pay.” Also, Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Principles of Social Reconstruction</i> (George Allen and Unwin, <abbr>Ltd.</abbr>). <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the discussion of this question in the preceding chapter. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
